---
title: 'Thinking About Syncing: Examining the impact of 21^st^ century DJ technology on the production
and performance of Electronic Dance Music'
author: 
    - name: Mike Callander
      affiliation: University of Melbourne
      city: Melbourne
      country: Australia
      email: hello@mikecallander.com.au
author-header: M. Callander
abstract: |
  The introduction of synchronisation (sync) to the professional toolkit
  of the disc jockey (DJ) in the early 2000s proved to be controversial
  and divisive. Until that point, DJs had been so focused on
  beatmatching---the manual process of tempo-setting and alignment of
  tracks---that many dismissed sync as 'cheating'. Concern over
  technology-assisted creative output is not unique to electronic dance
  music (EDM). David Hockney's investigation into the use of optical aids
  by the Old Masters highlighted similar perspectives in visual art. As
  sync has simplified some of the mechanical aspects of DJing, DJs have
  shifted away from building sets by sequencing pre-recorded audio made by
  other music producers towards an approach that incorporates
  improvisatory composition and production. Through a process of
  reflective practice and critical review of technique and repertoire both
  pre- and post-sync, this paper discusses how technology shapes and
  informs the realisation of a DJ set, highlighting how sync has catalysed
  a disconnect between the performer, their gestures, the source material
  and audiences, necessitating a rethink on how we demonstrate and
  recognise technical virtuosity in performance. This paper concludes by
  arguing that virtuosity in modern DJing is primarily a product of
  instrument configuration and pre-production, an amalgamation of formerly
  distinct production and performance techniques, and identifies how
  sync's affordances might inform future views on DJ practice and the
  presentation of EDM.
anonymous: 'false'
bibliography: 'references'
papersize: a4
classoption: 12pt
reference-section-title: 'References'
year: 2022
volume: 38
number: 1
article-no: 5
date: '2021-10-30'
accepted-date: '2022-09-28'
published-date: '2023-03-31'
---

# Introduction

In a packed nightclub, DJ Davvincii appears, arms spread wide as the
crowd chants his name. He theatrically lowers a finger to start the
music, immediately sending the audience into a frenzy. Members of the
audience proclaim, "I love you, Davvincii," "*this* is music" and "he's
the king!" while the DJ finds time to fry an egg, play Jenga, draw a
self-portrait, swipe credit cards, play computer games, operate a
miniature train set and more. When he feigns a heart attack, the tension
is palpable, but the DJ miraculously recovers, finally striking the
oversize button marked BASS to set forth an apocalyptic response. The
performance, part of a Saturday Night Live (SNL) skit from 2014,
presents a comic take on a commonly-held mainstream trope about 21^st^
century DJ practice; one in which the craft and skill of DJing can be
automated and distilled down to a single button. Andy Samberg's
portrayal of DJ Davvincii and the response of his adoring fans
highlights the growing disconnect between performer, repertoire and
audience caused by disruptive technologies.

Canadian DJ Deadmau5, a notable artist in the *real* world of EDM,
sparked controversy by admitting that "we all hit play" (Zimmerman
2012). For Deadmau5, virtuosity is demonstrated in the studio, while
beatmatching---tempo-setting and aligning tracks[^1]---can be handled by
technology. A central argument in this paper is that beatmatching and
its automation through sync therefore sits at the centre of discourse on
virtuosity and authenticity in 21^st^ century DJing. In the pre-digital
era, that virtuosity was more easily identified: audiences heard and saw
DJs playing records and could directly connect performance gestures that
caused shifts in timing or pitch---furious backspins, or scratching back
and forth. DJs further demonstrated authenticity through "digging" i.e.
procuring rare and exclusive records and amassing enormous record
collections.

As vinyl gave way to digital audio, first through the introduction of
the CD format and then through digital audio files, the process of
collecting and handling music was made invisible, replaced by a panoply
of knobs, buttons and blinking lights (Butler 2014, p. 1) that might not
bear any obvious connection to the music played. By 2008 and armed with
sync, Canadian DJ Richie Hawtin had abandoned turntables and
beatmatching in pursuit of "something else" (Gholz 2011, p. 59), playing
digital audio and loops on four virtual decks using Traktor Pro DJ
software. He has since expanded further, incorporating modular
synthesizers, sequencers and effects into his DJ sets.

In 2012 Pioneer DJ released the CDJ2000NXS, a standalone but
network-connectable digital turntable that appealed to DJ approaches old
and new. On one hand offering tactile control of digital files akin to
handling records, and on the other offering a button marked SYNC, which
put automated beatmatching within arm's reach of all DJs except the
vinyl purist. Other affordances, such as quantized looping and immediate
file transferability, presented DJs with a compelling case to abandon
vinyl.

In 2011, Attias used the term "formatism" to explain a DJ's preference
for vinyl over digital audio via CDs, WAV files or MP3s, arguing that
"anxiety over formats in DJ culture marked a \'crisis of identity' that
was mediated by discourses of *virtuosity* and *authenticity*" (emphasis
Attias 2013, p. 17). Attias articulated two areas where these
aspirations are accompanied by anxieties that "continue to animate
current controversies in DJ culture \[...\]: a concern that new
technologies degrade the fidelity of musical recordings and a concern
that they undermine the development of musical technique" (2013, p. 21).

It is no surprise that many vinyl DJs considered sync and digital audio
a threat to the craft; product developers pursued a workflow where
beatmatching's "cognitive load is heavily reduced" (Anderson 2005), and
resistance came from both practitioners and academics. Mills suggested
that DJing might become "nothing more than a button any promoter can
push" (2013), while van Veen and Attias (2011) lamented that "the role
of the DJ as human agent of music selection has been removed completely
now."

This correlates to a shift by DJs toward the laptop, an instrument used
to produce music, prepare for a set, and to simultaneously play and
record a performance, with much of this work invisible to the audience.
Accordingly, Montano argued for a revised view on how authenticity and
skill was recognised, suggesting that "with the increasing use of CDs,
mp3s and computer programs such as Ableton Live, the notion that vinyl
and turntables represent the authentic technology of DJ culture seems
somewhat redundant" and that \"there needs to be a redefinition of the
concept of DJing and a reframing of the skills and abilities seen as
being essential to DJ practice" (2010, p.397).

Regardless of the DJ's choice to beatmatch by hand or by sync, from an
outsider's perspective, the set---the culmination of DJ curation and
programming---has barely changed since the 1970s. The audio remains a
collection of tracks, summed and arranged in long form with the
intention of minimising distinctions and maintaining continuity. Many
patrons cannot detect whether they are experiencing the nuances of
manual, human beatmatching or the precision of automated sync, and SNL's
representation of adoring EDM fans suggests that plenty do not care.

Sync presents an opportunity to move the DJ craft beyond its two-deck
conventions: more precise mixing; more channels, and new instruments
brought together in ways that were previously impossible. In so doing,
adding these new layers of control and automation can "obfuscate and
distend the moment of creation, making it more difficult for audiences
to connect what they see on stage with what they hear" (McAlpine 2019,
pp. 189-190). The risk is that by characterising DJ performance as did
the SNL sketch, the craft of the DJ is reduced to the press of a magic
button; EDM audiences are considered gullible, and DJs are considered
cheats.

Hawtin hardly seeks a reduced cognitive load, however; his setup
incorporates new instruments and techniques across the six-channel[^2]
Model 1 mixer that he helped to design. Before 2001, DJs could not have
imagined a performance on six channels, but with the cognitive load
historically devoted to beatmatching now freed up, modern DJs can move
beyond connecting the "intro" and "outro" sections of existing tracks to
be more creative with the underlying materials. This continues a
tradition established in the early 1970s by DJs like Nicky Siano, who in
1973 began playing on three turntables instead of two (Shapiro 2005, pp.
37-38). Siano made drastic temporal changes to records to make them fit
into his sets and used duplicate records to piece together new
arrangements. He was "not so much playing records as making music"
(Lawrence 2003, p. 107). Nevertheless, until the turn of the century,
the DJ's standard "two-deck" performance configuration had barely
changed, and as a result, neither had the form and structure of the DJ
set. Much of the craft of DJing was devoted to cueing up and handling
the transitions between vinyl records, and virtuosity was measured by
the number of simultaneous tracks a DJ could handle; by the late 1990s,
"three deck wizards" like Mills were considered virtuosi (Butler 2006,
p. 52; Reynolds 1998, pp. 272-273). Overall, it was the introduction of
new digital technologies---primarily MP3 files, digital controllers and
sync---that enabled DJs to overcome the tactile and cognitive
limitations of traditional DJ performance and to routinely play and
manipulate multiple tracks in real-time. As a consequence, the practice
and the output of DJing, and the notion of what constitutes virtuosic DJ
technique has changed.

This paper argues that sync continues the tradition of digital
disruption and extends it to consider the impact not only on music
performance, but on notions of authenticity and virtuosity.
Investigating the work of DJs such as Hawtin and Mills and the author's
own practice pre- and post-sync, it draws parallels between the
DJ-centric discourse on sync and David Hockney's enquiry into the use of
optics by the Old Masters of painting and drawing. Hockney's
practice-led research methodology allowed him to chart historical trends
in technology-assisted technique, and then to identify where artists
rejected precision and departed from that trend. Similar insights
emerged through the author's own performance design for a sync-driven
work entitled *Real Time, Online* (2020).

This paper concludes that rather than reducing the cognitive load of DJ
work, sync represents an opportunity to expand the DJ craft to
incorporate new instruments and new techniques---including those
previously viewed as the domain of producers (studio *makers* rather
than *performers)*---for combining pre-recorded audio with real-time
composition.

# A Selected History of Disruption

When the Beatles released *Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band* in
1967, the pop world realised that "performances and records were not
necessarily linked" (Moorefield 2010, p. 55). The album was the product
of 700 studio hours of "almost continuous" technological experimentation
(Tingen 2017). The production's final touches involved "the taping of
nonsense gibberish that they had decided to cut into pieces, stick
together at random and play backwards before putting it in the
concentric run-out groove of side two"[^3] (Julien 2008, p. 7). Pierre
Schaeffer was the first to exploit disc-based audio looping and
performance on multiple turntables---using shellac records to create
what he called "closed grooves" (Schaeffer 1952, 32-36)---an approach
that would be revisited by Techno producers playing vinyl in the 1990s.

In the 1980s, the UK Musicians' Union expressed concern that Gary
Numan's synthesizer music was "putting proper musicians out of work"
(Whalley 2009, 41:30), echoing the sentiment that radio DJs in 1920s USA
were putting live musicians out of work (Brewster & Broughton 2006, p.
33). Simon Frith's commentary on disruptions caused by drum machines
succinctly articulated the problem of human-machine interfacing more
broadly: "It reflects \[the\] belief that the drummer is a musician in a
way that the drum-machine programmer is not" (1986, p. 265). Other
electronic instruments, such as the Fairlight CMI, "\[gave\] rise to the
new types of practitioner, such as the 'programmer'" (Marrington 2020,
p. 718).

In Detroit in 1992, Mills asked his record cutting engineer, Ron Murphy,
to cut circular grooves on one side of a double-LP release (Mills, Banks
& Hood 1992) to look like The Rings of Saturn. Where The Beatles had
added looped, layered, and reversed outtake chatter from the band's
studio sessions (Lewisohn 1989, 109), Mills at first sought a visual
effect. Murphy experimented further to add audio to the grooves
(Zlatopolsky 2015). At a fixed tempo, 133.33 beats per minute (BPM), and
with the record spinning at 33.33 revolutions per minute (RPM), he
discovered a workable method for creating endless musical loops of 1.8
seconds duration, where the downbeat of one musical bar synchronised
perfectly with each revolution of the record. In DJ circles these
concentric loops became known as locked grooves (LG).

Historically, DJs played commercial releases that were first arranged
and mixed in the studio, then mastered and manufactured before being
played live. The DJ's pursuit of a continuous mix in these settings
informed the structure of the tracks: producers made "DJ friendly"
arrangements that would build gradually with an "intro" and then end
with an "outro" (Rietveld 2011, pp. 6-7) to combine "the functions of
textural decrescendo and closing within a single section" (Butler 2006,
p. 224). Conventions for arranging intersected with conventions for
two-deck DJ performance, where DJs moved back and forth between records
on Deck A and Deck B, waiting patiently until "safe" points in an
arrangement to execute transitions without incident. The risk of
superimposed tracks playing out of time (a "trainwreck") imparts a
degree of risk upon any extended overlay, making a two-turntable
performance configuration enough for most DJs working un-synced. In
pursuing continuity most DJs *do* seek convenience, an observation that
emboldened Deadmau5 in asserting that "beatmatching isn't even a skill"
(Zimmerman 2012).

With audio materials reduced to short loops running at a fixed tempo,
DJs such as Mills and Hawtin used new performance approaches and formats
such as the LG to challenge the form of EDM. Assembling loops in
real-time facilitated a more fluid and flexible movement between tracks
(or *less-than-tracks* -- shorter loops created with the intent of
bridging transitions, creating breaks or providing textural layers[^4])
played simultaneously. Mills' live recording from a Japanese nightclub
*Live At The Liquid Room -- Tokyo* (1996) distributes excerpts of his
three-deck performance across a CD release in segments. "Segment 2"
includes thirteen tracks[^5] in just under twenty-four minutes,
including the Mills original "Loop 3," a locked groove hardly
distinguishable from the other loop-based arrangements played in Mills'
set. Although LGs are also necessarily mastered and cut to vinyl, this
short format brought Mills a step closer to merging his production and
performance practices by deferring any arranging until the moment of
performance.

Despite his prior challenge to EDM form through looping LGs and
loop-based studio arrangements, Mills did not seize the opportunity to
merge production and performance through the exploitation of sync.
Rather, he rejected it with the boldest of statements: *Exhibitionist*
(2004), a DVD mix compilation that celebrated the manual technique---and
the potential for error---of the Techno DJ. Amidst a market of carefully
curated DJ mix CDs assembled with precision, this was a bold statement
of "warts and all" DJing (Finlayson 2015). Within the first two minutes,
Mills arguably makes enough "mistakes" to convince any novice to stop
the mix and start over. The result of Mills' rhythmic drifting and
shifting is reminiscent of Steve Reich's *Piano Phase* (1967), a work
that was itself inspired by experiments with tape: *It's Gonna Rain*
(1965); and *Come Out* (1966). Mills' rejection of the affordances of
21^st^ century performance technologies echoes that of Paul Cézanne's
response to the photographic technologies that emerged in the 1870s and
the optical aids that preceded them, as discussed in the next section.

Once Hawtin began using software in performance, his works transformed
completely. This is evident between his mix CDs *Decks EFX & 909* (1999)
and *DE9 Transitions* (2005): software-based synchronisation replaced
manual beatmatching, arranged tracks no longer represented the building
blocks of a set. Hawtin either reduced these blocks to short loops in
advance, or he applied EQ and filters to strip tracks down to their
rhythmic skeleton, not unlike the work of a Dub producer extracting a
rhythm from a reggae song (Veal 2007, p. 48).

The loops and stems created as a product of this process were woven back
together in a tapestry of "six, seven, even 10 primary sources" (Loftus
2005). Effectively Hawtin created *remixes* of works by other artists,
then assembled these new productions in a DJ mix. By the time *DE9:
Transitions* was released in 2005, his blends were so elaborate that
each of the twenty-eight tracks was attributed to Hawtin as the original
artist, though not without credit to the artists from whom he sampled.
That this process might be characterised as *sampling* rather than
simply *playing tracks* shows how the work relied on studio processes as
much as performance techniques, facilitated by a common instrument
deployed to both pursuits: the laptop.

For the 21^st^ century DJ, technology has eased the mechanical burden of
creating new works, and though some practitioners and observers might
consider this "cheating," this affords the adopters of such technologies
an opportunity to incorporate new elements of performance into their
craft. Technology does not equate to a shortcut, but a facilitator and
redistributor of effort. This has direct parallels in other areas of
creative practice.

# David Hockney's Secret Knowledge

After visiting an exhibition of nineteenth century portraits by Ingres
at London's National Gallery in 1999, David Hockney began drawing with
an optical device called the camera lucida (Hockney 2006, p. 12),
eventually leading him to pursue a visual argument that "from the early
fifteenth century Western artists had not just been aware of, but had
relied on optics to create "living projections"" (Bolt 2010, p. 28). His
theory was met with resistance by colleagues and contemporaries: "their
main complaint was that for an artist to use optical aids would be
'cheating'; that somehow \[Hockney\] was attacking the idea of innate
artistic genius" (Hockney 2006, p. 14).

Hockney's research enquiry was itself assisted by technology: affordable
colour photocopying. After creating a wall of reproduced images that was
"seventy feet long and covered five hundred years more or less
chronologically" (Hockney 2006, p. 16), he could not only view the works
side by side, but could arrange a timeline to view the history of visual
art as it intersected with technologies that emerged to challenge or
assist it. This included lenses used by the Old Masters since 1430, and
"the invention that fixes the lens image with chemicals (photography)
doing away with the need for the artist's hand altogether" in 1839
(Hockney 2006, pp. 184-185).

In his broad overview, Hockney charts artists and their output with a
green line that runs parallel to a red line representing technology
(2006, pp. 184-185). Where the green line shows the work of
Michelangelo, for example, he is seen to depart from the red line
(electing not to use optics), but remains relatively close, due to the
influence of other practitioners and works. In the 1870s, once
photography had become more widespread and people had become more
exposed to its realism, artists such as Cézanne departed much further,
and after four centuries of realism, "awkwardness" returned (2006, p.
185). Hockney demonstrates this awkwardness by displaying Caravaggio's
1597 work, *Basket of Fruit* next to Cézanne's 1878-79 painting,
*Apples* (2006, pp. 188-189). It is no surprise that Caravaggio's
position on the green line touches the red line that represents
technology; the precise detail in his fruit is almost photographic,
especially next to Cézanne's awkward apples that appeared after
photographic perfection could be achieved with a camera. Hockney's
argument was not that one work is more skilled than the other, but that
our understanding of how each work was created can be advanced through
more focused research -- why didn't Cézanne use optics?

![Caravaggio's *Basket of Fruit* 1597/1600. Source: [Google Arts & Culture](https://g.co/arts/AdsMtfH9NKWAsckQ6), reproduced under a creative commons
license.](./media/fig1-fruit.jpg)

![Cézanne's *Apples* 1878-79. Source: [Google Arts & Culture](https://artsandculture.google.com/asset/apples-paul-c%C3%A9zanne/yAEUXsQdLx5tkA), reproduced under a creative commons
license.](./media/fig2-apples.jpg)

This kind of enquiry allows us to better understand why artists deploy
different techniques and media: Cézanne's decision to "eyeball" a
subject asserts an artistic view that transcends realism. To draw this
back to DJ practice, consider Mills' approach to beatmatching:

> *I\'ll let it fall off a little bit before you hear it, so you can
> feel it coming together. Because, you know, we\'re dealing with
> people, and people are not machines. Perfection is not always the
> point \[...\] If you never let the audience hear that, then they might
> believe that you\'re perfect, and that you mix like a computer, like
> software* (2019).

Even when DJs elect not to utilise sync, they operate amongst a field of
practitioners for whom it is widely available, just as the Old Masters
"would have seen paintings and drawings made with \[optics\], and maybe
even some projections themselves (to see optical projections is to use
them); and as apprentices they probably copied works with optical
effects" (Hockney 2006, p. 17). In EDM, where precise, sync-driven
transitions have become increasingly commonplace, the audience might
expect precision from performers who choose not to use the technology.
Still, just as Cézanne did not seek high resolution perfection in his
execution of *Apples*, performers such as Mills favour the imperfection
of manual assembly---micro-timing between discrete rhythms, alignments
pursued in real-time and by feel---over the precision of sync.

Despite its precision, there are limitations and skills inherent in
using sync, many of which are yet to be fully investigated. Consider
Hockney's comment on the use of optical aids: "let me say here that
optics do not make marks, only the artist's hand can do that, and it
requires great skill. And optics don't make drawing any easier, either,
far from it -- I know, I've used them" (2006, p. 14). Bolt reviewed
Hockney's drawings with and without optics: "the line was much surer and
more confident than the "groping lines" of a drawer struggling to "see"
and record freehand. However, in this confidence it lacked the struggle,
the variation in line quality and indeterminacy of the eyeballed
drawing" (2010, p. 28).

In DJ performance, the difference between the sure hand of sync and the
groping lines of manual assembly is worth exploring. Mills must work
harder for every alignment between tracks, and in so doing generates a
sonic outcome characterised by variation and indeterminacy that is, for
many listeners, more appealing than the rigidity and confidence of a
sync-driven Hawtin set.

#  Analysis of pre- and post-sync technique and repertoire

The differences between a synced Hawtin and an un-synced Mills, and
between Caravaggio and Cézanne---utilising technology for precision in
creative practice or rejecting it---are evident in a side-by-side
viewing of two performance works by the author. The first is
*Honkytonks: The Last Dance* (2006) (*TLD*), a vinyl-only set performed
with two Technics SL1210 turntables and a two-channel Pioneer DJ mixer.
This was released globally as a DJ mix CD, a format since superseded by
online radio streaming and podcasting. The second is *Real Time Online*
(2020) (*RTO*), an audio-visual (AV) performance using Ableton Live on
an Apple MacBook Pro and a six-channel Model 1 mixer. This was
transmitted via Facebook Live during the Covid-19 pandemic. The
following section describes pre-production, performance design, and
examples of DJ mix transitions in *The Last Dance* and *Real Time
Online*, then discusses how they each embody different facets of
virtuosity and authenticity.

## The Last Dance

[Full Set (1)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5574244)

*TLD* paid homage to traditional DJ practice. Comprising fourteen tracks
by other producers, the continuous set was live-mixed by the author.

![Mike Callander mix for *Honkytonks: The Last Dance* (2006)](./media/fig3-honkytonks.jpg)

## Pre-Production

The work of curating and then performing this mix was punctuated by
months spent in front of spreadsheets and emails: licensing deals were
negotiated with producers and labels, permissions granted, and a
shortlist approved. This represented a commitment to digging that moved
beyond finding records to securing the rights to combine and re-record
them. Once opening and closing tracks were selected, the planned
transitions between tracks were rehearsed in an effort to map out a
musical trajectory for the set. In the years after digital DJ devices
emerged, authenticity was front of mind for both audiences and
performers, and so the decision to perform the set using vinyl, and to
record the mix in a single take without further editing was a commitment
to the history of the DJ craft. The CD liner notes for *TLD* proudly
announced: "these are real turntable mixes, using vinyl, two Technics
SL1210s and a mixer" (Callander & Chabdjian 2006). This echoed the
sentiment of rock bands that explicitly asserted their authenticity:
Queen plastered a statement on their 1970s albums that read "no
synthesizers!" (Milburn 2013, 112); and Rage Against The Machine
proclaimed that \"no samples, keyboards or synthesizers \[were\] used in
the making of this record\" (de La Rocha, Morello, Comerford & Wilk
1992).

## Execution

In *TLD,* a cautious approach to live DJ performance is evident from the
outset. After four minutes of the first track, Jackmate's *80SC7SEQ*
(Baumann 2003), Hervé AK's *Serial X* (Hervé 2006) blends in smoothly
([Transition 1A](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5574244)). The sparse
outro of the former allowed for the alignment of the two without the
need to adjust the mixer's equalisation and volume. When the first track
entered its sparser outro phase, the transition became a matter of
maintaining alignment. Within a minute, only *Serial X* was
audible---not a quick mix à la Mills, but a safe one. The set progresses
in a similar vein, the DJ barely intervening in the arrangements as they
had been cut to vinyl, instead focusing his attention on the transitions
between tracks. With two records spinning, the tempo had to be set by
ear; analogue turntables lack the precise tempo readings that are
presented by digital decks in decimal increments. Every suspended
overlay represented a risk to the performance and required continual
adjustment.

As the set continues, the mixing becomes more cautious as the DJ aims
for safe transitions to avoid an audible trainwreck from derailing the
recorded performance to that point. The boldest interruptions amount to
little more than early exits from tracks, the DJ preferring the
performative safety of leaving a single track in play without creating
an audible chasm of frequency, rhythm or volume ([Transition
1B](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5574244)). Occasionally an
opportunity presented to exit a track earlier than at the outro. During
a short break around halfway into *No Matter Whether* (Scasacia 2005),
the mix switched quickly to the beatless intro section of *Bildeburg
Group* by Konrad Black and David Brown (2006) ([Transition
1C](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5574244)). This transition
capitalised upon energetic shifts happening on an intra-track basis: the
ambient introduction to *Bildeburg Group* provided a sense of drama in
an otherwise continuous flow of forward-moving, minimalist Techno; the
short break in *No Matter Whether* represented an opportune moment to
switch between two beatless sections.

The DJ's part in the process really *was* that of a disc
*jockey*---*riding* the forward motion of these records and switching
from one to the other, but without generating energy that was distinct
from the tracks as they had been produced. Aside from deciding which
track to play when, at what pace and for how long, the DJ technique had
little impact on the sound or shape of each record. The DJ selected,
presented, and blended works by other producers, but did not produce or
compose.

## Authenticity and virtuosity before sync

*TLD* prioritised mixing *live* to capture the recording in a single
take and on *vinyl only* as a matter of artistic choice. Though the
setup was not dissimilar to that used by Mills in 2004 (two turntables
rather than three, plus a mixer), the digital precision that emerged in
other performances around that time, especially from Hawtin, had
evidently influenced the set. To achieve Hawtin's digital precision at
the frequency of Mills' vinyl execution is beyond the reach of most DJs.
Accordingly, the performance was executed with caution, seeking a
comparable precision but without using the technologies that could
guarantee it. Though this approach resisted emerging digital
technologies, it lacked the confidence of Mills or Cézanne in
celebrating the awkwardness inherent in that choice; virtuosity was a
matter of minimising mistakes in the pursuit of flawless technical
execution.

In recording *TLD*, virtuosity was further displayed through curatorship
and programming: tracks were selected carefully, arranged in order, and
then assembled without technical incident. In spruiking the releases,
the matter of authenticity was addressed by emphasising that the mix had
been recorded without any post-performance editing. As the set was
executed without any studio tricks, it was *real* DJing, an honest
representation of how the set would be performed live. This approach is
embedded with nostalgia, more like a direct-to-disc recording of Frank
Sinatra and his orchestra in the 1940s-1950s (Granata 2004, pp. 37-38)
than *Sgt. Pepper*'s 700 hours of production using multi-track tape.

## Real Time, Online

[Full Set (2)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5574244)

*Real Time, Online* deployed a modern approach to DJing that was
inspired by the LG format discussed earlier: un-arranged, loop-based
tracks were assembled in real-time. Performed across six channels and
held together by sync, records and turntables were replaced by three
channels of pre-recorded audio and accompanied by three more channels of
electronic instruments. In June 2020, with support from the City of
Melbourne's *Covid-19 Quick Response Arts Grants*,[^6] the set premiered
via Facebook Live. The funding proposal demonstrated how ideas for the
craft had changed: "real time audio and video synthesis merges with the
artist\'s own form in a multimedia broadcast that cannot be replicated
and will exist only online." Authenticity in this performance was not
connected to format or curatorship, but to time and place: the combined
sum of pre-recorded audio and improvised accompaniment would be unique
to the moment of assembly. The intent for *RTO* was to push the
boundaries of DJing as far as possible, as Hawtin inferred, allowing the
DJ to do "something else" (Gholz 2011, p. 59).

## Pre-Production

Most of the audio used in *RTO* was recorded at Melbourne Electronic
Sound Studio (MESS), in front of unfamiliar instruments such as Moog's
System 55 or Buchla's 200 modular system, with their audio output routed
into Ableton Live. With recording enabled, sampling, re-sampling, and
programming began immediately. Passages of audio were duplicated,
edited, looped, and layered alongside subsequent overdubs. The new ideas
that emerged through that process were saved as versions, leaving the
previous session intact and creating a new virtual sketch. The best of
these were rendered as audio and distributed across three tracks in a
new Live set, and then routed into respective stereo channels of the
Model 1 mixer.

Working in threes facilitated a performance approach somewhere between
"we all press play" and a more fluid improvised assembly. It enabled
moving from one piece of recorded audio to the next as any traditional
DJ might, but it also enabled the exploitation of opportunities afforded
to DJs through powerful DAWs in the 21^st^ century---duplicated audio
signals, looping, and an expanded track count. Through this workflow,
the un-arranged studio-made track was treated as a flexible building
block for mixing in multiple directions, rather than a destination
reached via typical mix transitions from one track to another.

## Execution and analysis

Ableton Live was used to track the playback of audio clips alongside
summed audio that had been routed back into Live's Arrangement View,
while a video camera documented the performance. This enabled review of
the set's inputs and outputs simultaneously on a shared timeline, and
correlation between performance gestures and sonic outcomes. The visual
timeline below shows which tracks were introduced, when, and for how
long.

![ *RTO* timeline from Ableton Live. Clips from Live's Session View
were recorded into the Arrangement View. The fourth layer (light blue)
shows MIDI notation from Native Instruments Maschine 2. The fifth layer
(green) is summed audio from the Model 1.](./media/fig4-rto.jpg)

The CD liner for Hawtin's *Decks EFX & 909* (1999) presented a similar
view of DJing that departs from typical Deck A to Deck B programming;
this demonstrates Hawtin's early interest in sync-enabled multi-channel
performance. Rather than one complete track transitioning to another,
this was a more elaborate deconstruction and reassembly of tracks, with
a less obvious delineation between one and the next, and less adherence
to the outro-intro conventions of DJing with commercial releases.

![Arrangement detail from Hawtin's *Decks EFX & 909* (1999).](./media/fig5-decksEFX909.jpg)

## Deconstructing a modern mix

At the beginning of *RTO* it took more than nine minutes before the
first track, "Moog Modular 3.2," was audibly removed from the mix,
though any listener could be forgiven for missing the point where it
dissolved over time. "Jupiter 6 ALT 3 Hypnogroove" was introduced at
00:04:07, but it was not until 00:09:34 that the first track had
disappeared completely ([Transition
2A](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5574244)). Fluidity was the
objective, as it was for Hawtin's *DE9* trilogy (1999; 2001; 2005).
Across three channels, and with various clips representing partial
deconstructions of two original works, the summed audio transformed
gradually over time. This approach to assembling tracks was continued
throughout the hour-long performance.

| ITEM | TIME | TRACK 1 | TRACK 2 | TRACK 3 |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | 0:44 - 4:07 | Moog Modular 3.2 | Moog Modular 3.2 | Moog Modular 3.2 |
| 2 | 4:07 - 6:18 | Moog Modular 3.2 | Moog Modular 3.2 | Jupiter 6 ALT 3 Hypnogroove  |
| 3 | 6:18 - 9:34 | Moog Modular 3.2 | Jupiter 6 ALT 3 Hypnogroove  | Jupiter 6 ALT 3 Hypnogroove  |
| 4 | 9:34 - 9:38* | Buchla 200 v5 new comp quickmix | Jupiter 6 ALT 3 Hypnogroove  | Jupiter 6 ALT 3 Hypnogroove  |
| 5 | 9:38 - 13:15 | Buchla 200 v5 new comp quickmix | Jupiter 6 ALT 3 Hypnogroove  | Buchla 200 v5 new comp quickmix |
| 6 | 13:15 - 13:17* | Buchla 200 v5 new comp quickmix | Miniman 7.1 (2020) v5 new comp | Buchla 200 v5 new comp quickmix |
| 7 | 13:17 - 22:03 | Buchla 200 v5 new comp quickmix | Miniman 7.1 (2020) v5 new comp | Miniman 7.1 (2020) v5 new comp |
| **8** | **22:03 - 24:24** | **Buchla 200 v5 new comp quickmix** | **Miniman 7.1 (2020) v5 new comp** | **Monomillsian 7 newcomp** |
| 9 | 24:24 - 28:05 | Monomillsian 7 newcomp | Miniman 7.1 (2020) v5 new comp | Monomillsian 7 newcomp |
| **10** | 28:05 - 31:26 | Monomillsian 7 newcomp | Miniman 7.1 (2020) v5 new comp | **New Cwejman System START AGAIN v2** |
| 11 | 31:26 - 34:00 | Monomillsian 7 newcomp | New Cwejman System START AGAIN v2 | New Cwejman System START AGAIN v2 |
| **12** | 34:00 - 34:22* | Monomillsian 7 newcomp | New Cwejman System START AGAIN v2 | **King of the Bush 2020 - for real time online** |
| 13 | 34:22 - 41:43 | King of the Bush 2020 - for real time online | New Cwejman System START AGAIN v2 | King of the Bush 2020 - for real time online |
| **14** | 41:43 - 41:45* | King of the Bush 2020 - for real time online | **New Cwejman System START AGAIN v2 | Korg Poly 5 - new comp** |
| 15 | 41:45 - 44:33 | King of the Bush 2020 - for real time online | Korg Poly 5 - new comp | Korg Poly 5 - new comp |
| **16** | 44:33 - 45:19 | King of the Bush 2020 - for real time online | **Korg Poly 5 - new comp | New Cwejman System v2** |
| 17 | 45:19 - 53:00 | New Cwejman System v2 | Korg Poly 5 - new comp | New Cwejman System v2 |
| 18 | 53:00 - end | New Cwejman System v2 | Korg Poly 5 - new comp | __Man I Am Ready 2020 new comp this track was not made audible.__ |
Table: Timestamps for tracks played in *RTO*. Bold rows (8, 10, 12, 14, 16) indicate where clips from three separate tracks played simultaneously. At other times the set represented blended duplicates or triplicates from the same source audio.

The process of moving from one track to the next represented a kind of
homogenisation between works. If part of one track stood out from the
other, it was equalised or filtered, or its volume was lowered, until at
the mixer it became difficult to determine the origin of each sound.
With sync mitigating the risk of a trainwreck, the DJ's cognitive
function could be directed towards the blend of frequencies and
amplitudes, rather than towards rhythmic alignment. While a blend
between tracks was pursued in both the pre- and post-sync performances,
in this performance the blends were more gradual, more layered, and more
precise ([Transition 2B](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5574244)).

## Authenticity and virtuosity after sync

Virtuosity in *RTO* was not displayed through tactile handling, but
through performance configuration and pre-production; as Deadmau5
explained: "my "skills" and other PRODUCER'S skills shine where it
*\[sic\]* needs to shine: in the goddamned studio" (2012. Emphasis
Zimmerman).

Skill in *RTO* was demonstrated through the design of a custom
instrument that was configured to play exclusive music---routing
discrete audio outputs from Ableton Live through a Model 1 mixer departs
significantly from two-deck conventions---and because the DJ's handling
of the music was unique to that performance. It was not necessary to
demonstrate visible tactile control over the alignment of tracks,
instead tracks that had never been heard were composed on the fly. DJ
performance and studio production were amalgamated.

Armed with a suite of original and exclusive audio and engaged in a
newly-combined practice between studio and stage, the DJ did not need to
dig for records, nor seek permission to use them. From start to finish,
this set belonged to the DJ; authenticity was demonstrated through the
scope of the work and an expansion of technical skills. Authenticity and
virtuosity were intertwined, but in a manner different to that advanced
by Attias (2013, p. 17): the performance was realised entirely through
the work of a solo practitioner using new tools, such as Ableton Live
instead of turntables, distinct from the fourteen studio producers and
one performing DJ involved in the execution of *TLD*.

# Conclusion

This paper began by highlighting the disruptive effects of sync.
Automating the work of beatmatching led to a conceptual divide between
those who view DJing as being inextricably linked to the tactile craft
of playing records, and those who see the DJ as a practitioner that
works on producing, arranging and instrument configuration before
presenting music in a live setting.

In the tradition of technology-assisted performance and production, sync
and digital audio do present a challenge to the DJ craft. It is the
assertion of this paper that the challenge should result in the
evolution and growth, rather than the death, of DJing. While digital
audio removes some of the difficulties in sourcing and handling records,
and sync automates some of the DJ's work in connecting tracks,
practitioner concerns over technology-assisted practice are only valid
where it is assumed that making a task easier necessarily results in a
loss of skill. If deployed in a two-turntable setup, where DJs simply
continue the work of connecting tracks made by other producers, sync
would certainly reduce the DJ's cognitive load, but should that matter
to our ideas for quality in performance?

This paper presents an expanded view of the scope of DJing, where the
work of production and performance can be amalgamated. The modern
practice amounts to more than finding and connecting ready-made records;
it involves making new works and executing more elaborate real-time
combinations. Evidently, the DJ's embodiment of authenticity and
virtuosity can also be amalgamated; the modern DJ can be a producer of
recorded musical works *and* a producer of live performance works.
Comparisons between *RTO* and *TLD* showed that virtuosity and
authenticity did not disappear as a result of sync, they were
demonstrated at different stages and in different ways.

*RTO* demonstrated, and Hawtin continues to demonstrate, that DJs can
use sync as an opportunity to do *something else* and *something more*
in performance. New ways of DJing that explore techniques and
configurations previously impracticable are emerging as more DJs
redeploy the headspace and dexterity that is freed up by utilising sync.
When paired with a desire to pursue improvisatory assemblage in a more
fluid and immediate manner, the reduced cognitive load offered by sync
is offset by an increased cognitive capacity during performance, and a
front-loading of the work required to realise a more elaborate set.

*RTO* exemplified a modern approach to DJing that departs from its
historical conventions. At a technical level, utilising sync enabled
longer blends between less developed tracks that were distributed and
manipulated across an expanded track count. More broadly, and
considering how the performer combines technique and repertoire, sync
facilitated a greater degree of improvisation, and enabled deferral of
arranging and mixing---the realisation of a track---until the execution
of a set.

Through critical review of technique and repertoire both pre- and
post-sync, this paper outlines a series of technology-mediated
transitions. Set preparation shifted from record digging to production
and pre-production: new works were made to play, rather than made for
record store shelves. The new shape of materials necessitated a
reconfiguration of performance instruments. Matters of authenticity and
virtuosity were disconnected from the vinyl format, and the historical
methods for handling it, to an all-in-one offering: production and
performance merged. This correlates to a shift toward the laptop, an
instrument used to produce music, prepare for a set, and to
simultaneously play and record a performance. *RTO* also made use of
that same device to review the performance on a more analytical level.
As laptops become more powerful and their interfaces more interactive,
it is likely they will be used even more extensively in DJ practice.

For those of us deciding how to align and assemble audio, and for anyone
watching and listening, these discoveries should inform future views of
DJ practice and the presentation of Electronic Dance Music. With the
SYNC button in front of most new DJs, many will learn to perform with
that technology enabled. A few might seek more of a challenge, or some
connection to the past, and will learn to play records as a point of
distinction. This choice between convenience and manual control is
reminiscent of driving a car, where features such as automatic
transmission, power steering and cruise control are optional.

With sync enabled, DJs will be gig-ready in a shorter time. With more
DJs in the field, there will be more competition and more innovation.
The relentless emergence of new beat-making machines, sequencers and
groove boxes will encourage them to improvise with new compositions: to
loop, rearrange, edit and effect works in real-time. This trend is
already evident amongst next wave Techno DJs such as Amelie Lens and
Charlotte de Witte, each of whom "takes a totally new direction" with
the Pioneer RMX-1000 DJ effector and sampler (\"RMX-1000 Professional DJ
effector & sampler (black) - Pioneer DJ\", n.d.). The difference between
existing works and exclusive performance works will blur further, and
just as a young Nicky Siano experimented on three turntables in 1973,
these modern DJs will be not so much *playing* *records* as *making*
*music*.

# Acknowledgement

This research was conducted on the land of the Yalukit Willam clan of
the Boonwurrung/Bunorong people. Sovereignty was never ceded; it always
was and always will be Aboriginal Land. I acknowledge the Traditional
Owners as this country's first artists and researchers, and I recognise
my privilege to live and work on their land while colonial structures
and policies remain in place.

# References

```{=latex}
\begin{hangparas}{1.5em}{1}
```
Andersen, T. H. (2005). In the mixxx: novel digital DJ interfaces. *CHI
'05* *Extended* *Abstracts of Human Factors in Computing Systems*, USA,
1136--1137. <https://doi.org/10.1145/1056808.1056850>

Attias, B. A. (2013). Subjectivity in the Groove: Phonography,
Digitality and Fidelity. In B. A. Attias, A. Gavanas, \& H. C. Rietveld
(Eds.), *DJ Culture in the Mix: Power, Technology and Social Change in
Electronic Dance Music* (pp. 15--49). New York: Bloomsbury.

Baumann, M. (2003). 80SC7SEQ. On *Prodigal Son* \[2LP\]. Frankfurt:
Resopal Schallware.

Bolt, B. (2010). The Magic is in Handling. In E. Barrett \& B.
Bolt, *Practice as Research: Approaches to Creative Arts Enquiry* (pp.
27-34). London: IB Tauris.

Brewster, B., & Broughton, F. (2006). *Last Night a DJ Saved My Life:
The History of the Disc Jockey*. New York, NY: Grove Press.

Black, K., & Brown, D. (2006). *Bildeburg Group* \[12inch vinyl\].
London: Volt Musik.

Butler, M. J. (2006). *Unlocking the Groove:* *Rhythm, Meter and Musical
Design in Electronic Dance Music*. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.

Butler, M. J. (2014). *Playing with Something That Runs: Technology,
Improvisation and Composition in DJ and Laptop Performance*. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.

Callander, M., & Chabdjian, A. (2006). *Honkytonks: The Last
Dance*\[2xCD\]. Melbourne: Honkytonks/Stomp.

Callander, M. (2020). *Real Time, Online* \[DJ Performance Video\].
Melbourne: No label. <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5574244>

Caravaggio, M. (1597/1600). Basket of Fruit \[image\]. *Google Arts &
Culture*.
<https://artsandculture.google.com/asset/basket-of-fruit-caravaggio-michelangelo-merisi/MwEu3e99qoXUHA>

Cézanne, P. (1878-79). Apples \[image\]. *Google Arts & Culture*.
<https://artsandculture.google.com/asset/apples-paul-cézanne/yAEUXsQdLx5tkA>

de La Rocha, Z., Morello, T., Comerford, T., & Wilk, B. (1992). *Rage
Against The Machine* \[Recorded by Rage Against The Machine\]. \[CD\].
New York, NY: Epic.

Finlayson, A. (2015). Jeff Mills - Exhibitionist 2 Review. Retrieved 20
October 2021, from <https://ra.co/reviews/18029>

Frith, S. (1986). Art versus technology: the strange case of popular
music. *Media, Culture & Society*, *8*(3), 263-279.
<http://doi.org/10.1177/016344386008003002>

Gholz, C. S. (2011). Maintaining "Synk" in Detroit: Two case studies in
the remix aesthetic. *Dancecult: Journal of Electronic Dance Music
Culture* 2(1), 45-62. <https://doi.org/10.12801/1947-5403.2011.02.01.03>

Granata, C. (2004). *Sessions with Sinatra*. Chicago, IL: Chicago Review
Press.

Hawtin, R. (1999). *Decks EFX & 909* \[CD\]. London: NovaMute.

Hawtin, R. (2001). *DE9: Closer To The Edit* \[CD\]. Windsor, ON: M_nus.

Hawtin, R. (2005). *DE9: Transitions* \[DVD\]. London: NovaMute.

Hervé, N. (2006). *Serial X* \[12inch vinyl\]. Cologne: K2/Kompakt.

Hockney, D. (2006). *Secret Knowledge: Rediscovering the lost techniques
of the Old Masters(Rev. ed.)*. London: Thames & Hudson.

Julien, O. (2008). *Sgt. Pepper and the Beatles: It was Forty Years Ago
Today*. Hampshire: Ashgate.

Lawrence, T. (2003). *Love Saves The Day: A History of American Dance
Music Culture, 1970-1979*. Durham: Duke University Press.

Lewisohn, M. (1989). *The Beatles Recording Sessions: The Official Abbey
Road Studio Session Notes, 1962-1970*. New York, NY: Harmony.

Loftus, J. (2005). Richie Hawtin: DE9: Transitions Review. Retrieved 20
October 2021, from
<https://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/3771-de9-transitions/>

Marrington, M. (2021, March 19). \[Review of the book *Digital Sampling:
The Design and Use of Music Technologies*, by Paul Harkins\]. *Popular
Music*, *39*(3-4), 717-720. <http://doi.org/10.1017/s0261143020000665>

McCartney, P., Lennon, J., Harrison, G. and Starr, R., 1967. *Sgt.
Pepper\'s Lonely Hearts Club Band* \[Recorded by The Beatles\]. \[LP\]
London: Parlophone.

Milburn, K. (2013). Futurism and Musical Meaning in Synthesized
Landscapes. *Kaleidoscope* 5(1), 109-116.
<https://openresearch.lsbu.ac.uk/item/87945>

Mills, J., Banks, M., & Hood, R. (1992). *Discovers The Rings of Saturn*
\[Recorded by X-102\]. \[2LP\]. Berlin: Tresor.

Mills, J. (1996). *Live At The Liquid Room -- Tokyo* \[CD\]. London:
React.

Mills, J. (2004). *Exhibitionist* \[DVD\]. Chicago: Axis.

Mills, J. (2013, January 21). *Techno Icon Jeff Mills talks about 20
years of Axis Records and retiring The Wizard/ Interviewer*: *Christine
Kakaire* \[interview, text\]. Retrieved from
<https://web.archive.org/web/20150704221317/https:/news.beatport.com/jeff-mills-sequence-interview/>

Mills, J. (2019, April 2). The Art of DJing: *Jeff Mills/Interviewer:
Will Lynch* \[feature interview, text\]. Retrieved from
<https://ra.co/features/3436>

McAlpine, K. B. (2019). *Bits and Pieces: A History of Chiptunes*. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Montano, E. (2008). 'You're Not A Real Dj Unless You Play Vinyl' --
Technology And Formats -- The Progression Of Dance Music And Dj Culture.
*Journal on the Art of Record Production*, 3.
[https://www.arpjournal.com/asarpwp/'you're-not-a-real-dj-unless-you-play-vinyl'----technology-and-formats----the-progression-of-dance-music-and-dj-culture/](https://www.arpjournal.com/asarpwp/‘you’re-not-a-real-dj-unless-you-play-vinyl’-–-technology-and-formats-–-the-progression-of-dance-music-and-dj-culture/)

Montano, E. (2010). \'How do you know he\'s not playing Pac-Man while
he\'s supposed to be DJing?\': technology, formats and the digital
future of DJ culture. *Popular Music* 29(3), 397--416.
[https://doi:10.1017/S0261143010000449](https://doi:10.1017/S0261143010000449)

Moorefield, V. (2010). *The producer as composer*. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Reich, S. (1965). It's Gonna Rain. On *Early Works* \[CD\]. New York,
NY: Elektra Nonesuch. (1987)

Reich, S. (1966). Come Out. On *Early Works* \[CD\]. New York, NY:
Elektra Nonesuch. (1987)

Reich, S. (1967). Piano Phase. On *Early Works* \[CD\]. New York, NY:
Elektra Nonesuch. (1987)

Reynolds, S. (1998). *Generation ecstasy*. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and
Company.

Rietveld, H. (2011). Disco's Revenge: House Music's Nomadic
Memory. *Dancecult*, *2*(1), 4-23. doi:
<http://doi.org/10.12801/1947-5403.2011.02.01.01>

RMX-1000 Professional DJ effector & sampler (black) - Pioneer DJ.
Retrieved 20 October 2021, from
<https://www.pioneerdj.com/en-au/product/effector/rmx-1000/black/overview/>

Saturday Night Live. (2014, May 18). *When Will The Bass Drop* \[Video
file\]. Retrieved from <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XCawU6BE8P8>

Scasascia, R. (2005). *No Matter Whether* \[12inch vinyl\]. London:
Dreck Records.

Schaeffer, P. (2012). *In Search of a Concrete Music* (C. North & J.
Dack, Trans.). Berkeley: University of California Press. (Original work
published 1952)

Shapiro, P. (2005). *Turn The Beat Around: The Secret History of Disco*.
New York, NY: Faber and Faber.

Tingen, P. (2017). Inside Track: Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band.
Retrieved 20 October 2021, from
<https://www.soundonsound.com/techniques/inside-track-sgt-peppers-lonely-hearts-club-band>

van Veen, T. C. and Attias, B. A. (2011). Off the Record: Turntablism
and Controllerism in the 21st Century, Part 1. *Dancecult: Journal of
Electronic Dance Music Culture,* 3(1).
<http://dx.doi.org/10.12801/1947-5403.2011.03.01.08>

Veal, M. (2007). *Dub: Soundscapes and Shattered Songs in Jamaican
Reggae*. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.

Whalley, B. (2009). *Synth Britannia* \[Film\]. London: BBC Four.

Zimmerman, J. \[Deadmau5\] (2012, June 26). Dance DJs are Glorified
Button Pushers. *Gizmodo*.
<https://www.gizmodo.com.au/2012/06/rant-all-djs-are-glorified-button-pushers/>

Zlatopolsky, A. (2015). Behind the Groove: The Ron Murphy Story.
Retrieved 20 October 2021, from
<https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/05/ron-murphy-feature>

```{=latex}
\end{hangparas}
```

[^1]: In DJ parlance, 'track' usually refers to an arranged work.
    Historically these were played from vinyl, then from CDs. The advent
    of digital audio led to flexibility in the type and shape of tracks
    that could be played. Here 'track' refers to audio played by DJs,
    distinct from the track one might find on a Digital Audio
    Workstation (DAW) -- DJs and producers often refer to these discrete
    audio tracks as 'stems'.

[^2]: Since then, Hawtin has moved to performing on a modified
    ten-channel desk designed by his father, an Allen & Heath
    PLAYdifferently MODEL 1 \"EX\" with additional direct output
    modifications on the extended rear panel.

[^3]: The run-out groove prevents the needle from reaching the record's
    inner label by trapping it in a loop.

[^4]: In fairness to records arranged according to the sections form
    outlined in the previous paragraph, it is worth making a distinction
    between a 1.8-second audio loop and a complete track.

[^5]: Mills played thirteen separate pieces of audio from vinyl. These
    were presented as a single CD track, in this case labelled a
    'segment'.

[^6]: Detail on CoM Covid-19 grants
    <https://www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/arts-and-culture/strategies-support/funding/Pages/assistance-creatives-covid-19.aspx>
